docs: add guide to standalone components preview (#46058)
angular/angular: aio/content/guide/standalone-components.md

# Getting started with standalone components

In v14 and higher, **standalone components** provide a simplified way to build Angular applications. Standalone components, directives, and pipes aim to streamline the authoring experience by reducing the need for `NgModule`s. Existing applications can optionally and incrementally adopt the new standalone style without any breaking changes.

> 

Reviewer: We should probably add this note after the introductory paragraph to make it clear the state of development the feature is in. I couldn't find any existing boilerplate content for this, so if there's not a better boilerplate available, you can use this.

```
<div class="alert is-important">

The standalone component feature is available for developer preview. 
It's ready for you to try; but it might change before it is stable.

</div>
```

Author: Added

## Using standalone components in NgModule-based applications

Standalone components can also be imported into existing NgModules-based contexts. This allows existing applications (which are using NgModules today) to incrementally adopt the new, standalone style of component.

You can import a standalone component (or directive, or pipe) just like you would an `NgModule` - using `NgModule.imports`:

```ts
@NgModule({
  declarations: [AlbumComponent],
  exports: [AlbumComponent], 
  imports: [PhotoGalleryComponent],
})
export class AlbumModule {}
```

## Bootstrapping an application using a standalone component

An Angular application can be bootstrapped without any `NgModule` by using a standalone component as the application's root component. This is done using the `bootstrapApplication` API:

```ts
// in the main.ts file
import {bootstrapApplication} from '@angular/platform-browser';
import {PhotoAppComponent} from './app/photo.app.component';

bootstrapApplication(PhotoAppComponent);
```

> ### Configuring Dependency Injection

Reviewer: Configuring dependency injection
Titles should be sentence cased.

### Lazy loading a standalone component

Any route can lazily load its routed, standalone component by using `loadComponent`:

```ts
export const ROUTES: Route[] = [
  {path: 'admin', loadComponent: () => import('./admin/panel.component').then(mod => mod.AdminPanelCmp)},
  // ...
];
```

This works as long as the loaded component is standalone.

### Lazy loading many routes at once

The `loadChildren` operation now supports loading a new set of child `Route`s without needing to write a lazy loaded `NgModule` that imports `RouterModule.forChild` to declare the routes. This works when every route loaded this way is using a standalone component.

```ts
// In the main application:
export const ROUTES: Route[] = [
  {path: 'admin', loadChildren: () => import('./admin/routes').then(mod => mod.ADMIN_ROUTES)},
  // ...
];

// In admin/routes.ts:
export const ADMIN_ROUTES: Route[] = [
  {path: 'home', component: AdminHomeCmp},
  {path: 'users', component: AdminUsersCmp},
  // ...
];
```

### Providing services to a subset of routes

> The lazy loading API for `NgModule`s (`loadChildren`) creates a new "module" injector when it loads the lazily-loaded children of a route. This feature was often useful to provide services only to a subset of routes in the application. For example, if all routes under `/admin` were scoped using a `loadChildren` boundary, then admin-only services could be provided only to those routes. Doing this required using the `loadChildren` API, even if lazy loading of the routes in question was unnecessary.

Reviewer: _lazily-loaded_ doesn't need a hyphen,

Author: ok

*   **node injectors** configured in `@Directive.providers` / `@Component.providers` or `@Component.viewProviders`. Those providers are visible to a given component and all its children only.

#### Environment injectors

Making `NgModule`s optional will require new ways of configuring "module" injectors with application-wide providers (for example, [HttpClient](https://angular.io/api/common/http/HttpClient)). In the standalone application (one created with `bootstrapApplication`), “module” providers can be configured during the bootstrap process, in the `providers` option: 

```ts
bootstrapApplication(PhotoAppComponent, {
  providers: [
    {provide: BACKEND_URL, useValue: 'https://photoapp.looknongmodules.com/api'},
    {provide: PhotosService, useClass: PhotosService},
    // ...
  ]
});
```

The new bootstrap API gives us back the means of configuring “module injectors” without using `NgModule`s. In this sense, the “module” part of the name is no longer relevant and we’ve decided to introduce a new term: “environment injectors”. 

Environment injectors can be configured using one of the following:

> *   `@NgModule.providers `(in applications bootstrapping through an `NgModule`);

Reviewer: The closing code tag (backquote) used for `@NgModule.providers ` should come before the space between words.

Author: Yep!

```ts
@Component({
  standalone: true,
  selector: 'photo-gallery',
  imports: [ImageGridComponent],
  template: `
    ... <image-grid [images]="imageList"></image-grid>
  `,
})
export class PhotoGalleryComponent {
  // component logic
}
```

`imports` can also be used to reference standalone directives and pipes. In this way, standalone components can be written without the need to create an `NgModule` to manage template dependencies.

### Using existing NgModules in a standalone component

When writing a standalone component, you may want to use other components, directives, or pipes in the component's template. Some of those dependencies might not be marked as standalone, but instead declared and exported by an existing `NgModule`. In this case, you can import the `NgModule` directly into the standalone component:

```ts
@Component({
  standalone: true,
  selector: 'photo-gallery',
  // an existing module is imported directly into a standalone component
  imports: [MatButtonModule],
  template: `
    ...
    <button mat-button>Next Page</button>
  `,
})
export class PhotoGalleryComponent {
  // logic
}
```

> Writing standalone components doesn’t prevent you from using existing `NgModule`-based libraries or dependencies in your template. Standalone components can take full advantage of the existing ecosystem of Angular libraries.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can use standalone components with existing `NgModule`-based libraries or dependencies in your template. Standalone components can take full advantage of the existing ecosystem of Angular libraries.
```

Positive sentiment.

## Using standalone components in NgModule-based applications

> Standalone components can also be imported into existing NgModules-based contexts. This allows existing applications (which are using NgModules today) to incrementally adopt the new, standalone style of component.

Reviewer 2: Above we have `NgModule` and here we haven't wrapped `NgModule` within an inline code block. Looks like you're using one for singular and not wrapping plurals?

Author: Yeh, this was the convention I was using.

You can import a standalone component (or directive, or pipe) just like you would an `NgModule` - using `NgModule.imports`:

```ts
@NgModule({
  declarations: [AlbumComponent],
  exports: [AlbumComponent], 
  imports: [PhotoGalleryComponent],
})
export class AlbumModule {}
```

## Bootstrapping an application using a standalone component

An Angular application can be bootstrapped without any `NgModule` by using a standalone component as the application's root component. This is done using the `bootstrapApplication` API:

```ts
// in the main.ts file
import {bootstrapApplication} from '@angular/platform-browser';
import {PhotoAppComponent} from './app/photo.app.component';

bootstrapApplication(PhotoAppComponent);
```

### Configuring dependency injection

When bootstrapping an application, often you want to configure Angular’s dependency injection and provide configuration values or services for use throughout the application. You can pass these as providers to `bootstrapApplication`:

```ts
bootstrapApplication(PhotoAppComponent, {
  providers: [
    {provide: BACKEND_URL, useValue: 'https://photoapp.looknongmodules.com/api'},
    // ...
  ]
});
```

> The standalone bootstrap operation is based on explicitly configuring a list of `Provider`s for dependency injection. However, existing libraries may rely on `NgModule`s for configuring DI. For example, Angular’s router uses the `RouterModule.forRoot()` helper to set up routing in an application. You can use these existing `NgModule`s in `bootstrapApplication` via the `importProvidersFrom` utility:

Reviewer 2: Do we need to capitalize provider and wrap it in an inline code block?

```ts
bootstrapApplication(PhotoAppComponent, {
  providers: [
    {provide: BACKEND_URL, useValue: 'https://photoapp.looknongmodules.com/api'},
    importProvidersFrom(
      RouterModule.forRoot([/* app routes */]),
    ),
    // ...
  ]
});
```

## Routing and lazy-loading

The router APIs were updated and simplified to take advantage of the standalone components: an `NgModule` is no longer required in many common, lazy-loading scenarios.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Author: 👍

### Lazy loading a standalone component

Any route can lazily load its routed, standalone component by using `loadComponent`:

```ts
export const ROUTES: Route[] = [

>   {path: 'admin', loadComponent: () => import('./admin/panel.component').then(mod => mod.AdminPanelCmp)},

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  {path: 'admin', loadComponent: () => import('./admin/panel.component').then(mod => mod.AdminPanelComponent)},
```

This is in alignment with the style guide.

Author: changed.

  // ...
];
```

This works as long as the loaded component is standalone.

### Lazy loading many routes at once

The `loadChildren` operation now supports loading a new set of child `Route`s without needing to write a lazy loaded `NgModule` that imports `RouterModule.forChild` to declare the routes. This works when every route loaded this way is using a standalone component.

```ts
// In the main application:
export const ROUTES: Route[] = [
  {path: 'admin', loadChildren: () => import('./admin/routes').then(mod => mod.ADMIN_ROUTES)},
  // ...
];

// In admin/routes.ts:

> export const ADMIN_ROUTES: Route[] = [

Reviewer 2: Not sure if we're using upper snake case in the rest of the documentation for constants?

Author: Not sure either. Leaving it as-is for now.

>   {path: 'home', component: AdminHomeCmp},

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  {path: 'home', component: AdminHomeComponent},
```

Author: Changed.

>   {path: 'users', component: AdminUsersCmp},

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  {path: 'users', component: AdminUsersComponent},
```

Author: Changed.

  // ...
];
```

### Providing services to a subset of routes

The lazy loading API for `NgModule`s (`loadChildren`) creates a new "module" injector when it loads the lazily loaded children of a route. This feature was often useful to provide services only to a subset of routes in the application. For example, if all routes under `/admin` were scoped using a `loadChildren` boundary, then admin-only services could be provided only to those routes. Doing this required using the `loadChildren` API, even if lazy loading of the routes in question was unnecessary.

> The Router now supports explicitly specifying additional `providers` on a Route, which allows this same scoping without the need for either lazy loading or `NgModule`s. For example, scoped services within an `/admin` route structure would look like:

Reviewer 2: Should we wrap Route in an inline code block?

Author: Wrapped.

    children: [
      path: 'users', component: AdminUsersComponent,
      path: 'teams', component: AdminTeamsComponent,
    ],
  },
  // ... other application routes that don't
  //     have access to ADMIN_API_KEY or AdminService.
];
```

It's also possible to combine `providers` with `loadChildren` of additional routing configuration, to achieve the same effect of lazy loading an `NgModule` with additional routes and route-level providers. This example configures the same providers/child routes as above, but behind a lazy loaded boundary:

```ts
// Main application:
export const ROUTES: Route[] = {
  // Lazy-load the admin routes.
  {path: 'admin', loadChildren: () => import('./admin/routes').then(mod => mod.ADMIN_ROUTES)},
  // ... rest of the routes
}

// In admin/routes.ts:
export const ADMIN_ROUTES: Route[] = [{
  path: '',
  pathMatch: 'prefix',
  providers: [
    AdminService,
    {provide: ADMIN_API_KEY, useValue: 12345},
  ],
  children: [
    {path: 'users', component: AdminUsersCmp},
    {path: 'teams', component: AdminTeamsCmp},
  ],
}];
```

Note the use of an empty-path route to host `providers` that are shared among all the child routes.

## Advanced topics

> This section goes into more details that are relevant only to more advanced usage patterns. You can safely skip this section when learning about standalone components, directives, and pipes for the first time. 

Reviewer 2: Love that disclaimer!

Author: Cool :-)

### Standalone components for library authors

Standalone components, directives, and pipes can be exported from `NgModule`s that import them:

```ts
@NgModule({
  imports: [ImageCarouselComponent, ImageSlideComponent],
  exports: [ImageCarouselComponent, ImageSlideComponent],
})
export class CarouselModule {}
```

> This pattern is useful for Angular libraries that publish a set of cooperating directives. In the above example, both the `ImageCarouselComponent` and `ImageSlideComponent` need to be present in a template to build up one logical “carousel widget”. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This pattern is useful for Angular libraries that publish a set of cooperating directives. In the above example, both the `ImageCarouselComponent` and `ImageSlideComponent` need to be present in a template to build up one logical "carousel widget". 
```

Author: Done
